---
title: "Accelerating SARS-CoV-2l Variant Sequencing with HTCondor" 
date: 2020-11-18T12:00:00+00:00
excerpt: MADISON - David O’Connor, professor at the UW School of Medicine and Public Health, reports that recent advances in genetic sequencing of viruses makes it possible to track the spread of SARS-CoV-2 throughout communities in Wisconsin.
publish: true
--- 

[HTCondor Week 2021](https://agenda.hep.wisc.edu/event/1579/) held May 24 - 28 2021 opened with a bang as world renown researcher [Dave O'Connor](https://experts.news.wisc.edu/experts/david-o-connor), Medical Foundation Professor of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, kicked off the start of HTCondor Week 2021 On May 24th, he launched the event by speaking about accelerating SARS-CoV-2 variant sequencing with HTCondor. Through the power of high throughput computing provided by Center for High Throughput Computing (CHTC), the O'Connor Lab has been able to conduct computational work investigating viruses. His work is well respected across the globe as it furthers the scientific community's understanding of viruses such as HIV, Zika, and COVID-19. 
With COVID-19 impacting millions globally, such research is more imperative now more than ever. O'Connor's group has used more than 160 million core hours to aid in sequencing the COVID-19 virus.  In February 2020 at the start of the pandemic, the lab was asked to help sequence the COVID-19 virus. Through a process coined deep sequencing, they generated a large amount of DNA sequencing data in real-time. Such a task used to take an instrument a week or longer to complete the process whereas now it is reduced to a matter of minutes. However, after deep sequencing is completed, data analysis is still needed which is where Dave O'Connor stated, "This is where CHTC has been absolutely vital in their work." Since the start of the pandemic, the group has generated over 4,000 sequences, which has been done through CHTC resources. They have developed workflows in HTCondor to clean the sequences for quality control, take the sequences from a particular run to demultiplex them, map the reads, and find out how similar it is to other genomes that have been previously mapped in the past. 
Through viral sequencing, the group has discovered the origin of infection amongst outbreaks to find coherent information on the most common places of transmission, which in most cases is the community. This outcome happened to be true amongst healthcare workers at the UW hospital. By sequencing the viruses from the cases associated with outbreaks across campus, the lab traced infections from transmission events such as dorm outbreaks and collegiate football games. The Madison community and so many other places around the globe have gained a better understanding of how transmission occurs as a result of the O'Connor Lab utilizing HTCondor resources. 
